---
layout: post
title: "Dialogues on ‘Art is Performance’"
subtitle: "A First Response"
date: 2015-06-21
author: "Andrew Keech"
header-img: "img/articles/dialogues/keech-post-bg.jpg"
---

<p ><< In response to Paul Bucci's <a href="{{ page.previous.url | prepend: site.baseurl | replace: '//', '/' }}">Introduction and First Thoughts</a>.</p>

<p><strong>KEECH:</strong> To comment directly on the idea of the art object as a repository of accumulated aesthetic value, it's a difficult notion to deal with. Such a notion seems a very useful one for talking with people who are very fixated on a labour theory of value. But, as Paul pointed out, there's a lot of difficulty in really describing what value a gesture ought to have (in the 'material' terms which are frequently privileged in economically-tilted philosophies) when its primary function is to be expressive. This difficulty seems to stem from two gotchas which come to mind immediately when considering art as it is made (which accrues cost of some kind) and appreciated (which generates some value) today. There is still room to get around each of these complications where a labour centred theory of aesthetic value may develop.</p>

<p>First, within the conventional representational relationship people assume when viewing art, there is a logic counter to the valuation of labour which disconnects the cost of making a work from its value (which may or may not be connected to its price in a market context). Artistic gestures are expected to be, at some level, aesthetically bountiful and overflow the form they're delivered in. There is a normative implication that artistic value then should exceed whatever material costs are incurred in the making of a gesture. In one sense art is mostly valued and judged somewhere apart from the material cost of its production (labour or otherwise). From this perspective there is the implication that there is a necessary separation between the physical form and the ideal content of an artistic gesture, and the value of its making seems entirely dependent on the original idea or sensation.</p>

<p>However, particularly in sculpture and artworks that get mass media attention, the enormous material expense dedicated to a work can be a crucial aspect of the aesthetic effect; art as we experience it is usually something more than just a concept, or a title. As gestures, they are commonly seen as better when they are the result of a larger effort or cost (leading to the popular confusions, discussions, and obsessions with the market price of art, and the associated side-effects of fetishizing expensive things). And this perception does have some extension into the contemporary visual arts community, though the emphasis on the "non-material" aspects of a gesture are privileged in the literature, as the physical form follows  from some prior intellectual direction. So, while it's quite easy to think of a separation between the "immaterial" (and thus, somehow non-real or un-laborious) aspects of artistic production and the more obvious "material" labour involved in making a gesture present in the world for an audience, considering art without making hard distinctions between a physical and ideal (aesthetic) world may be more fertile territory to develop.</p>

<p>The second hang-up, after now presuming that there is a wide field of efforts and costs that add up in making the art to be valued, is that despite considerable commitment and the best intentions, a lot of art falls totally flat. The unsuccessful gesture, which can disappoint the ambitions of its maker or those of its audience, is in a sense no less of an artwork than the extremely well-regarded. However, it's obvious that there is a high level of variability in the amount of value seen in any particular work of art, which we know also changes over time and across context. Knowing that irrespective of the efforts put into a project that it could very easily be horribly boring and completely unrewarding puts into question, again, whether the labour of making a gesture has anything but the most basic relationship to its value.</p>

<p>The only room to wiggle that I've seen to get away from this intractable problem of the highly variable value of artistic labour is in the recognition and embrace of frivolousness as a valid result. Demanding that all art achieve the highest success to be worth doing, from a perspective which seeks to justify art by its having been done, seems too high a standard to set; perhaps such a philosophy implicitly cannot make strong value distinctions between art which may otherwise be considered canonic on one side and piffle on the other.</p>